---
title: Part III
class: part
---

##

### The Makers of Fire

The cub came upon it suddenly. It was his own fault.
He had been careless. He had left the cave and run down to the
stream to drink. It might have been that he took no notice because
he was heavy with sleep. (He had been out all night on the meat-trail,
and had but just then awakened.) And his carelessness might have
been due to the familiarity of the trail to the pool. He had travelled
it often, and nothing had ever happened on it.

He went down past the blasted pine, crossed the open space, and trotted
in amongst the trees. Then, at the same instant, he saw and smelt.
Before him, sitting silently on their haunches, were five live things,
the like of which he had never seen before. It was his first glimpse
of mankind. But at the sight of him the five men did not spring
to their feet, nor show their teeth, nor snarl. They did not move,
but sat there, silent and ominous.

Nor did the cub move. Every instinct of his nature would have
impelled him to dash wildly away, had there not suddenly and for the
first time arisen in him another and counter instinct. A great
awe descended upon him. He was beaten down to movelessness by
an overwhelming sense of his own weakness and littleness. Here
was mastery and power, something far and away beyond him.

The cub had never seen man, yet the instinct concerning man was his.
In dim ways he recognised in man the animal that had fought itself to
primacy over the other animals of the Wild. Not alone out of his
own eyes, but out of the eyes of all his ancestors was the cub now looking
upon man—out of eyes that had circled in the darkness around countless
winter camp-fires, that had peered from safe distances and from the
hearts of thickets at the strange, two-legged animal that was lord over
living things. The spell of the cub’s heritage was upon
him, the fear and the respect born of the centuries of struggle and
the accumulated experience of the generations. The heritage was
too compelling for a wolf that was only a cub. Had he been full-grown,
he would have run away. As it was, he cowered down in a paralysis
of fear, already half proffering the submission that his kind had proffered
from the first time a wolf came in to sit by man’s fire and be
made warm.

One of the Indians arose and walked over to him and stooped above
him. The cub cowered closer to the ground. It was the unknown,
objectified at last, in concrete flesh and blood, bending over him and
reaching down to seize hold of him. His hair bristled involuntarily;
his lips writhed back and his little fangs were bared. The hand,
poised like doom above him, hesitated, and the man spoke laughing, “_Wabam
wabisca ip pit tah_.” (“Look! The white fangs!”)

The other Indians laughed loudly, and urged the man on to pick up
the cub. As the hand descended closer and closer, there raged
within the cub a battle of the instincts. He experienced two great
impulsions—to yield and to fight. The resulting action was
a compromise. He did both. He yielded till the hand almost
touched him. Then he fought, his teeth flashing in a snap that
sank them into the hand. The next moment he received a clout alongside
the head that knocked him over on his side. Then all fight fled
out of him. His puppyhood and the instinct of submission took
charge of him. He sat up on his haunches and ki-yi’d.
But the man whose hand he had bitten was angry. The cub received
a clout on the other side of his head. Whereupon he sat up and
ki-yi’d louder than ever.

The four Indians laughed more loudly, while even the man who had
been bitten began to laugh. They surrounded the cub and laughed
at him, while he wailed out his terror and his hurt. In the midst
of it, he heard something. The Indians heard it too. But
the cub knew what it was, and with a last, long wail that had in it
more of triumph than grief, he ceased his noise and waited for the coming
of his mother, of his ferocious and indomitable mother who fought and
killed all things and was never afraid. She was snarling as she
ran. She had heard the cry of her cub and was dashing to save
him.

She bounded in amongst them, her anxious and militant motherhood
making her anything but a pretty sight. But to the cub the spectacle
of her protective rage was pleasing. He uttered a glad little
cry and bounded to meet her, while the man-animals went back hastily
several steps. The she-wolf stood over against her cub, facing
the men, with bristling hair, a snarl rumbling deep in her throat.
Her face was distorted and malignant with menace, even the bridge of
the nose wrinkling from tip to eyes so prodigious was her snarl.

Then it was that a cry went up from one of the men. “Kiche!”
was what he uttered. It was an exclamation of surprise.
The cub felt his mother wilting at the sound.

“Kiche!” the man cried again, this time with sharpness
and authority.

And then the cub saw his mother, the she-wolf, the fearless one,
crouching down till her belly touched the ground, whimpering, wagging
her tail, making peace signs. The cub could not understand.
He was appalled. The awe of man rushed over him again. His
instinct had been true. His mother verified it. She, too,
rendered submission to the man-animals.

The man who had spoken came over to her. He put his hand upon
her head, and she only crouched closer. She did not snap, nor
threaten to snap. The other men came up, and surrounded her, and
felt her, and pawed her, which actions she made no attempt to resent.
They were greatly excited, and made many noises with their mouths.
These noises were not indication of danger, the cub decided, as he crouched
near his mother still bristling from time to time but doing his best
to submit.

“It is not strange,” an Indian was saying. “Her
father was a wolf. It is true, her mother was a dog; but did not
my brother tie her out in the woods all of three nights in the mating
season? Therefore was the father of Kiche a wolf.”

“It is a year, Grey Beaver, since she ran away,” spoke
a second Indian.

“It is not strange, Salmon Tongue,” Grey Beaver answered.
“It was the time of the famine, and there was no meat for the
dogs.”

“She has lived with the wolves,” said a third Indian.

“So it would seem, Three Eagles,” Grey Beaver answered,
laying his hand on the cub; “and this be the sign of it.”

The cub snarled a little at the touch of the hand, and the hand flew
back to administer a clout. Whereupon the cub covered its fangs,
and sank down submissively, while the hand, returning, rubbed behind
his ears, and up and down his back.

“This be the sign of it,” Grey Beaver went on.
“It is plain that his mother is Kiche. But his father was
a wolf. Wherefore is there in him little dog and much wolf.
His fangs be white, and White Fang shall be his name. I have spoken.
He is my dog. For was not Kiche my brother’s dog?
And is not my brother dead?”

The cub, who had thus received a name in the world, lay and watched.
For a time the man-animals continued to make their mouth-noises.
Then Grey Beaver took a knife from a sheath that hung around his neck,
and went into the thicket and cut a stick. White Fang watched
him. He notched the stick at each end and in the notches fastened
strings of raw-hide. One string he tied around the throat of Kiche.
Then he led her to a small pine, around which he tied the other string.

White Fang followed and lay down beside her. Salmon Tongue’s
hand reached out to him and rolled him over on his back. Kiche
looked on anxiously. White Fang felt fear mounting in him again.
He could not quite suppress a snarl, but he made no offer to snap.
The hand, with fingers crooked and spread apart, rubbed his stomach
in a playful way and rolled him from side to side. It was ridiculous
and ungainly, lying there on his back with legs sprawling in the air.
Besides, it was a position of such utter helplessness that White Fang’s
whole nature revolted against it. He could do nothing to defend
himself. If this man-animal intended harm, White Fang knew that
he could not escape it. How could he spring away with his four
legs in the air above him? Yet submission made him master his
fear, and he only growled softly. This growl he could not suppress;
nor did the man-animal resent it by giving him a blow on the head.
And furthermore, such was the strangeness of it, White Fang experienced
an unaccountable sensation of pleasure as the hand rubbed back and forth.
When he was rolled on his side he ceased to growl, when the fingers
pressed and prodded at the base of his ears the pleasurable sensation
increased; and when, with a final rub and scratch, the man left him
alone and went away, all fear had died out of White Fang. He was
to know fear many times in his dealing with man; yet it was a token
of the fearless companionship with man that was ultimately to be his.

After a time, White Fang heard strange noises approaching.
He was quick in his classification, for he knew them at once for man-animal
noises. A few minutes later the remainder of the tribe, strung
out as it was on the march, trailed in. There were more men and
many women and children, forty souls of them, and all heavily burdened
with camp equipage and outfit. Also there were many dogs; and
these, with the exception of the part-grown puppies, were likewise burdened
with camp outfit. On their backs, in bags that fastened tightly
around underneath, the dogs carried from twenty to thirty pounds of
weight.

White Fang had never seen dogs before, but at sight of them he felt
that they were his own kind, only somehow different. But they
displayed little difference from the wolf when they discovered the cub
and his mother. There was a rush. White Fang bristled and
snarled and snapped in the face of the open-mouthed oncoming wave of
dogs, and went down and under them, feeling the sharp slash of teeth
in his body, himself biting and tearing at the legs and bellies above
him. There was a great uproar. He could hear the snarl of
Kiche as she fought for him; and he could hear the cries of the man-animals,
the sound of clubs striking upon bodies, and the yelps of pain from
the dogs so struck.

Only a few seconds elapsed before he was on his feet again.
He could now see the man-animals driving back the dogs with clubs and
stones, defending him, saving him from the savage teeth of his kind
that somehow was not his kind. And though there was no reason
in his brain for a clear conception of so abstract a thing as justice,
nevertheless, in his own way, he felt the justice of the man-animals,
and he knew them for what they were—makers of law and executors
of law. Also, he appreciated the power with which they administered
the law. Unlike any animals he had ever encountered, they did
not bite nor claw. They enforced their live strength with the
power of dead things. Dead things did their bidding. Thus,
sticks and stones, directed by these strange creatures, leaped through
the air like living things, inflicting grievous hurts upon the dogs.

To his mind this was power unusual, power inconceivable and beyond
the natural, power that was godlike. White Fang, in the very nature
of him, could never know anything about gods; at the best he could know
only things that were beyond knowing—but the wonder and awe that
he had of these man-animals in ways resembled what would be the wonder
and awe of man at sight of some celestial creature, on a mountain top,
hurling thunderbolts from either hand at an astonished world.

The last dog had been driven back. The hubbub died down.
And White Fang licked his hurts and meditated upon this, his first taste
of pack-cruelty and his introduction to the pack. He had never
dreamed that his own kind consisted of more than One Eye, his mother,
and himself. They had constituted a kind apart, and here, abruptly,
he had discovered many more creatures apparently of his own kind.
And there was a subconscious resentment that these, his kind, at first
sight had pitched upon him and tried to destroy him. In the same
way he resented his mother being tied with a stick, even though it was
done by the superior man-animals. It savoured of the trap, of
bondage. Yet of the trap and of bondage he knew nothing.
Freedom to roam and run and lie down at will, had been his heritage;
and here it was being infringed upon. His mother’s movements
were restricted to the length of a stick, and by the length of that
same stick was he restricted, for he had not yet got beyond the need
of his mother’s side.

He did not like it. Nor did he like it when the man-animals
arose and went on with their march; for a tiny man-animal took the other
end of the stick and led Kiche captive behind him, and behind Kiche
followed White Fang, greatly perturbed and worried by this new adventure
he had entered upon.

They went down the valley of the stream, far beyond White Fang’s
widest ranging, until they came to the end of the valley, where the
stream ran into the Mackenzie River. Here, where canoes were cached
on poles high in the air and where stood fish-racks for the drying of
fish, camp was made; and White Fang looked on with wondering eyes.
The superiority of these man-animals increased with every moment.
There was their mastery over all these sharp-fanged dogs. It breathed
of power. But greater than that, to the wolf-cub, was their mastery
over things not alive; their capacity to communicate motion to unmoving
things; their capacity to change the very face of the world.

It was this last that especially affected him. The elevation
of frames of poles caught his eye; yet this in itself was not so remarkable,
being done by the same creatures that flung sticks and stones to great
distances. But when the frames of poles were made into tepees
by being covered with cloth and skins, White Fang was astounded.
It was the colossal bulk of them that impressed him. They arose
around him, on every side, like some monstrous quick-growing form of
life. They occupied nearly the whole circumference of his field
of vision. He was afraid of them. They loomed ominously
above him; and when the breeze stirred them into huge movements, he
cowered down in fear, keeping his eyes warily upon them, and prepared
to spring away if they attempted to precipitate themselves upon him.

But in a short while his fear of the tepees passed away. He
saw the women and children passing in and out of them without harm,
and he saw the dogs trying often to get into them, and being driven
away with sharp words and flying stones. After a time, he left
Kiche’s side and crawled cautiously toward the wall of the nearest
tepee. It was the curiosity of growth that urged him on—the
necessity of learning and living and doing that brings experience.
The last few inches to the wall of the tepee were crawled with painful
slowness and precaution. The day’s events had prepared him
for the unknown to manifest itself in most stupendous and unthinkable
ways. At last his nose touched the canvas. He waited.
Nothing happened. Then he smelled the strange fabric, saturated
with the man-smell. He closed on the canvas with his teeth and
gave a gentle tug. Nothing happened, though the adjacent portions
of the tepee moved. He tugged harder. There was a greater
movement. It was delightful. He tugged still harder, and
repeatedly, until the whole tepee was in motion. Then the sharp
cry of a squaw inside sent him scampering back to Kiche. But after
that he was afraid no more of the looming bulks of the tepees.

A moment later he was straying away again from his mother.
Her stick was tied to a peg in the ground and she could not follow him.
A part-grown puppy, somewhat larger and older than he, came toward him
slowly, with ostentatious and belligerent importance. The puppy’s
name, as White Fang was afterward to hear him called, was Lip-lip.
He had had experience in puppy fights and was already something of a
bully.

Lip-lip was White Fang’s own kind, and, being only a puppy,
did not seem dangerous; so White Fang prepared to meet him in a friendly
spirit. But when the strangers walk became stiff-legged and his
lips lifted clear of his teeth, White Fang stiffened too, and answered
with lifted lips. They half circled about each other, tentatively,
snarling and bristling. This lasted several minutes, and White
Fang was beginning to enjoy it, as a sort of game. But suddenly,
with remarkable swiftness, Lip-lip leaped in, delivering a slashing
snap, and leaped away again. The snap had taken effect on the
shoulder that had been hurt by the lynx and that was still sore deep
down near the bone. The surprise and hurt of it brought a yelp
out of White Fang; but the next moment, in a rush of anger, he was upon
Lip-lip and snapping viciously.

But Lip-lip had lived his life in camp and had fought many puppy fights.
Three times, four times, and half a dozen times, his sharp little teeth
scored on the newcomer, until White Fang, yelping shamelessly, fled
to the protection of his mother. It was the first of the many
fights he was to have with Lip-lip, for they were enemies from the start,
born so, with natures destined perpetually to clash.

Kiche licked White Fang soothingly with her tongue, and tried to
prevail upon him to remain with her. But his curiosity was rampant,
and several minutes later he was venturing forth on a new quest.
He came upon one of the man-animals, Grey Beaver, who was squatting
on his hams and doing something with sticks and dry moss spread before
him on the ground. White Fang came near to him and watched.
Grey Beaver made mouth-noises which White Fang interpreted as not hostile,
so he came still nearer.

Women and children were carrying more sticks and branches to Grey
Beaver. It was evidently an affair of moment. White Fang
came in until he touched Grey Beaver’s knee, so curious was he,
and already forgetful that this was a terrible man-animal. Suddenly
he saw a strange thing like mist beginning to arise from the sticks
and moss beneath Grey Beaver’s hands. Then, amongst the
sticks themselves, appeared a live thing, twisting and turning, of a
colour like the colour of the sun in the sky. White Fang knew
nothing about fire. It drew him as the light, in the mouth of
the cave had drawn him in his early puppyhood. He crawled the
several steps toward the flame. He heard Grey Beaver chuckle above
him, and he knew the sound was not hostile. Then his nose touched
the flame, and at the same instant his little tongue went out to it.

For a moment he was paralysed. The unknown, lurking in the
midst of the sticks and moss, was savagely clutching him by the nose.
He scrambled backward, bursting out in an astonished explosion of ki-yi’s.
At the sound, Kiche leaped snarling to the end of her stick, and there
raged terribly because she could not come to his aid. But Grey
Beaver laughed loudly, and slapped his thighs, and told the happening
to all the rest of the camp, till everybody was laughing uproariously.
But White Fang sat on his haunches and ki-yi’d and ki-yi’d,
a forlorn and pitiable little figure in the midst of the man-animals.

It was the worst hurt he had ever known. Both nose and tongue
had been scorched by the live thing, sun-coloured, that had grown up
under Grey Beaver’s hands. He cried and cried interminably,
and every fresh wail was greeted by bursts of laughter on the part of
the man-animals. He tried to soothe his nose with his tongue,
but the tongue was burnt too, and the two hurts coming together produced
greater hurt; whereupon he cried more hopelessly and helplessly than
ever.

And then shame came to him. He knew laughter and the meaning
of it. It is not given us to know how some animals know laughter,
and know when they are being laughed at; but it was this same way that
White Fang knew it. And he felt shame that the man-animals should
be laughing at him. He turned and fled away, not from the hurt
of the fire, but from the laughter that sank even deeper, and hurt in
the spirit of him. And he fled to Kiche, raging at the end of
her stick like an animal gone mad—to Kiche, the one creature in
the world who was not laughing at him.

Twilight drew down and night came on, and White Fang lay by his mother’s
side. His nose and tongue still hurt, but he was perplexed by
a greater trouble. He was homesick. He felt a vacancy in
him, a need for the hush and quietude of the stream and the cave in
the cliff. Life had become too populous. There were so many
of the man-animals, men, women, and children, all making noises and
irritations. And there were the dogs, ever squabbling and bickering,
bursting into uproars and creating confusions. The restful loneliness
of the only life he had known was gone. Here the very air was
palpitant with life. It hummed and buzzed unceasingly. Continually
changing its intensity and abruptly variant in pitch, it impinged on
his nerves and senses, made him nervous and restless and worried him
with a perpetual imminence of happening.

He watched the man-animals coming and going and moving about the
camp. In fashion distantly resembling the way men look upon the
gods they create, so looked White Fang upon the man-animals before him.
They were superior creatures, of a verity, gods. To his dim comprehension
they were as much wonder-workers as gods are to men. They were
creatures of mastery, possessing all manner of unknown and impossible
potencies, overlords of the alive and the not alive—making obey
that which moved, imparting movement to that which did not move, and
making life, sun-coloured and biting life, to grow out of dead moss
and wood. They were fire-makers! They were gods.

### The Bondage

The days were thronged with experience for White Fang. During
the time that Kiche was tied by the stick, he ran about over all the
camp, inquiring, investigating, learning. He quickly came to know
much of the ways of the man-animals, but familiarity did not breed contempt.
The more he came to know them, the more they vindicated their superiority,
the more they displayed their mysterious powers, the greater loomed
their god-likeness.

To man has been given the grief, often, of seeing his gods overthrown
and his altars crumbling; but to the wolf and the wild dog that have
come in to crouch at man’s feet, this grief has never come.
Unlike man, whose gods are of the unseen and the overguessed, vapours
and mists of fancy eluding the garmenture of reality, wandering wraiths
of desired goodness and power, intangible out-croppings of self into
the realm of spirit—unlike man, the wolf and the wild dog that
have come in to the fire find their gods in the living flesh, solid
to the touch, occupying earth-space and requiring time for the accomplishment
of their ends and their existence. No effort of faith is necessary
to believe in such a god; no effort of will can possibly induce disbelief
in such a god. There is no getting away from it. There it
stands, on its two hind-legs, club in hand, immensely potential, passionate
and wrathful and loving, god and mystery and power all wrapped up and
around by flesh that bleeds when it is torn and that is good to eat
like any flesh.

And so it was with White Fang. The man-animals were gods unmistakable
and unescapable. As his mother, Kiche, had rendered her allegiance
to them at the first cry of her name, so he was beginning to render
his allegiance. He gave them the trail as a privilege indubitably
theirs. When they walked, he got out of their way. When
they called, he came. When they threatened, he cowered down.
When they commanded him to go, he went away hurriedly. For behind
any wish of theirs was power to enforce that wish, power that hurt,
power that expressed itself in clouts and clubs, in flying stones and
stinging lashes of whips.

He belonged to them as all dogs belonged to them. His actions
were theirs to command. His body was theirs to maul, to stamp
upon, to tolerate. Such was the lesson that was quickly borne
in upon him. It came hard, going as it did, counter to much that
was strong and dominant in his own nature; and, while he disliked it
in the learning of it, unknown to himself he was learning to like it.
It was a placing of his destiny in another’s hands, a shifting
of the responsibilities of existence. This in itself was compensation,
for it is always easier to lean upon another than to stand alone.

But it did not all happen in a day, this giving over of himself,
body and soul, to the man-animals. He could not immediately forego
his wild heritage and his memories of the Wild. There were days
when he crept to the edge of the forest and stood and listened to something
calling him far and away. And always he returned, restless and
uncomfortable, to whimper softly and wistfully at Kiche’s side
and to lick her face with eager, questioning tongue.

White Fang learned rapidly the ways of the camp. He knew the
injustice and greediness of the older dogs when meat or fish was thrown
out to be eaten. He came to know that men were more just, children
more cruel, and women more kindly and more likely to toss him a bit
of meat or bone. And after two or three painful adventures with
the mothers of part-grown puppies, he came into the knowledge that it
was always good policy to let such mothers alone, to keep away from
them as far as possible, and to avoid them when he saw them coming.

But the bane of his life was Lip-lip. Larger, older, and stronger,
Lip-lip had selected White Fang for his special object of persecution.
White Fang fought willingly enough, but he was outclassed. His
enemy was too big. Lip-lip became a nightmare to him. Whenever
he ventured away from his mother, the bully was sure to appear, trailing
at his heels, snarling at him, picking upon him, and watchful of an
opportunity, when no man-animal was near, to spring upon him and force
a fight. As Lip-lip invariably won, he enjoyed it hugely.
It became his chief delight in life, as it became White Fang’s
chief torment.

But the effect upon White Fang was not to cow him. Though he
suffered most of the damage and was always defeated, his spirit remained
unsubdued. Yet a bad effect was produced. He became malignant
and morose. His temper had been savage by birth, but it became
more savage under this unending persecution. The genial, playful,
puppyish side of him found little expression. He never played
and gambolled about with the other puppies of the camp. Lip-lip
would not permit it. The moment White Fang appeared near them,
Lip-lip was upon him, bullying and hectoring him, or fighting with him
until he had driven him away.

The effect of all this was to rob White Fang of much of his puppyhood
and to make him in his comportment older than his age. Denied
the outlet, through play, of his energies, he recoiled upon himself
and developed his mental processes. He became cunning; he had
idle time in which to devote himself to thoughts of trickery.
Prevented from obtaining his share of meat and fish when a general feed
was given to the camp-dogs, he became a clever thief. He had to
forage for himself, and he foraged well, though he was oft-times a plague
to the squaws in consequence. He learned to sneak about camp,
to be crafty, to know what was going on everywhere, to see and to hear
everything and to reason accordingly, and successfully to devise ways
and means of avoiding his implacable persecutor.

It was early in the days of his persecution that he played his first
really big crafty game and got there from his first taste of revenge.
As Kiche, when with the wolves, had lured out to destruction dogs from
the camps of men, so White Fang, in manner somewhat similar, lured Lip-lip
into Kiche’s avenging jaws. Retreating before Lip-lip, White
Fang made an indirect flight that led in and out and around the various
tepees of the camp. He was a good runner, swifter than any puppy
of his size, and swifter than Lip-lip. But he did not run his
best in this chase. He barely held his own, one leap ahead of
his pursuer.

Lip-lip, excited by the chase and by the persistent nearness of his
victim, forgot caution and locality. When he remembered locality,
it was too late. Dashing at top speed around a tepee, he ran full
tilt into Kiche lying at the end of her stick. He gave one yelp
of consternation, and then her punishing jaws closed upon him.
She was tied, but he could not get away from her easily. She rolled
him off his legs so that he could not run, while she repeatedly ripped
and slashed him with her fangs.

When at last he succeeded in rolling clear of her, he crawled to
his feet, badly dishevelled, hurt both in body and in spirit.
His hair was standing out all over him in tufts where her teeth had
mauled. He stood where he had arisen, opened his mouth, and broke
out the long, heart-broken puppy wail. But even this he was not
allowed to complete. In the middle of it, White Fang, rushing
in, sank his teeth into Lip-lip’s hind leg. There was no
fight left in Lip-lip, and he ran away shamelessly, his victim hot on
his heels and worrying him all the way back to his own tepee.
Here the squaws came to his aid, and White Fang, transformed into a
raging demon, was finally driven off only by a fusillade of stones.

Came the day when Grey Beaver, deciding that the liability of her
running away was past, released Kiche. White Fang was delighted
with his mother’s freedom. He accompanied her joyfully about
the camp; and, so long as he remained close by her side, Lip-lip kept
a respectful distance. White-Fang even bristled up to him and
walked stiff-legged, but Lip-lip ignored the challenge. He was
no fool himself, and whatever vengeance he desired to wreak, he could
wait until he caught White Fang alone.

Later on that day, Kiche and White Fang strayed into the edge of
the woods next to the camp. He had led his mother there, step
by step, and now when she stopped, he tried to inveigle her farther.
The stream, the lair, and the quiet woods were calling to him, and he
wanted her to come. He ran on a few steps, stopped, and looked
back. She had not moved. He whined pleadingly, and scurried
playfully in and out of the underbrush. He ran back to her, licked
her face, and ran on again. And still she did not move.
He stopped and regarded her, all of an intentness and eagerness, physically
expressed, that slowly faded out of him as she turned her head and gazed
back at the camp.

There was something calling to him out there in the open. His
mother heard it too. But she heard also that other and louder
call, the call of the fire and of man—the call which has been
given alone of all animals to the wolf to answer, to the wolf and the
wild-dog, who are brothers.

Kiche turned and slowly trotted back toward camp. Stronger
than the physical restraint of the stick was the clutch of the camp
upon her. Unseen and occultly, the gods still gripped with their
power and would not let her go. White Fang sat down in the shadow
of a birch and whimpered softly. There was a strong smell of pine,
and subtle wood fragrances filled the air, reminding him of his old
life of freedom before the days of his bondage. But he was still
only a part-grown puppy, and stronger than the call either of man or
of the Wild was the call of his mother. All the hours of his short
life he had depended upon her. The time was yet to come for independence.
So he arose and trotted forlornly back to camp, pausing once, and twice,
to sit down and whimper and to listen to the call that still sounded
in the depths of the forest.

In the Wild the time of a mother with her young is short; but under
the dominion of man it is sometimes even shorter. Thus it was
with White Fang. Grey Beaver was in the debt of Three Eagles.
Three Eagles was going away on a trip up the Mackenzie to the Great
Slave Lake. A strip of scarlet cloth, a bearskin, twenty cartridges,
and Kiche, went to pay the debt. White Fang saw his mother taken
aboard Three Eagles’ canoe, and tried to follow her. A blow
from Three Eagles knocked him backward to the land. The canoe
shoved off. He sprang into the water and swam after it, deaf to
the sharp cries of Grey Beaver to return. Even a man-animal, a
god, White Fang ignored, such was the terror he was in of losing his
mother.

But gods are accustomed to being obeyed, and Grey Beaver wrathfully
launched a canoe in pursuit. When he overtook White Fang, he reached
down and by the nape of the neck lifted him clear of the water.
He did not deposit him at once in the bottom of the canoe. Holding
him suspended with one hand, with the other hand he proceeded to give
him a beating. And it _was_ a beating. His hand was
heavy. Every blow was shrewd to hurt; and he delivered a multitude
of blows.

Impelled by the blows that rained upon him, now from this side, now
from that, White Fang swung back and forth like an erratic and jerky
pendulum. Varying were the emotions that surged through him.
At first, he had known surprise. Then came a momentary fear, when
he yelped several times to the impact of the hand. But this was
quickly followed by anger. His free nature asserted itself, and
he showed his teeth and snarled fearlessly in the face of the wrathful
god. This but served to make the god more wrathful. The
blows came faster, heavier, more shrewd to hurt.

Grey Beaver continued to beat, White Fang continued to snarl.
But this could not last for ever. One or the other must give over,
and that one was White Fang. Fear surged through him again.
For the first time he was being really man-handled. The occasional
blows of sticks and stones he had previously experienced were as caresses
compared with this. He broke down and began to cry and yelp.
For a time each blow brought a yelp from him; but fear passed into terror,
until finally his yelps were voiced in unbroken succession, unconnected
with the rhythm of the punishment.

At last Grey Beaver withheld his hand. White Fang, hanging
limply, continued to cry. This seemed to satisfy his master, who
flung him down roughly in the bottom of the canoe. In the meantime
the canoe had drifted down the stream. Grey Beaver picked up the
paddle. White Fang was in his way. He spurned him savagely
with his foot. In that moment White Fang’s free nature flashed
forth again, and he sank his teeth into the moccasined foot.

The beating that had gone before was as nothing compared with the
beating he now received. Grey Beaver’s wrath was terrible;
likewise was White Fang’s fright. Not only the hand, but
the hard wooden paddle was used upon him; and he was bruised and sore
in all his small body when he was again flung down in the canoe.
Again, and this time with purpose, did Grey Beaver kick him. White
Fang did not repeat his attack on the foot. He had learned another
lesson of his bondage. Never, no matter what the circumstance,
must he dare to bite the god who was lord and master over him; the body
of the lord and master was sacred, not to be defiled by the teeth of
such as he. That was evidently the crime of crimes, the one offence
there was no condoning nor overlooking.

When the canoe touched the shore, White Fang lay whimpering and motionless,
waiting the will of Grey Beaver. It was Grey Beaver’s will
that he should go ashore, for ashore he was flung, striking heavily
on his side and hurting his bruises afresh. He crawled tremblingly
to his feet and stood whimpering. Lip-lip, who had watched the
whole proceeding from the bank, now rushed upon him, knocking him over
and sinking his teeth into him. White Fang was too helpless to
defend himself, and it would have gone hard with him had not Grey Beaver’s
foot shot out, lifting Lip-lip into the air with its violence so that
he smashed down to earth a dozen feet away. This was the man-animal’s
justice; and even then, in his own pitiable plight, White Fang experienced
a little grateful thrill. At Grey Beaver’s heels he limped
obediently through the village to the tepee. And so it came that
White Fang learned that the right to punish was something the gods reserved
for themselves and denied to the lesser creatures under them.

That night, when all was still, White Fang remembered his mother
and sorrowed for her. He sorrowed too loudly and woke up Grey
Beaver, who beat him. After that he mourned gently when the gods
were around. But sometimes, straying off to the edge of the woods
by himself, he gave vent to his grief, and cried it out with loud whimperings
and wailings.

It was during this period that he might have harkened to the memories
of the lair and the stream and run back to the Wild. But the memory
of his mother held him. As the hunting man-animals went out and
came back, so she would come back to the village some time. So
he remained in his bondage waiting for her.

But it was not altogether an unhappy bondage. There was much
to interest him. Something was always happening. There was
no end to the strange things these gods did, and he was always curious
to see. Besides, he was learning how to get along with Grey Beaver.
Obedience, rigid, undeviating obedience, was what was exacted of him;
and in return he escaped beatings and his existence was tolerated.

Nay, Grey Beaver himself sometimes tossed him a piece of meat, and
defended him against the other dogs in the eating of it. And such
a piece of meat was of value. It was worth more, in some strange
way, then a dozen pieces of meat from the hand of a squaw. Grey
Beaver never petted nor caressed. Perhaps it was the weight of
his hand, perhaps his justice, perhaps the sheer power of him, and perhaps
it was all these things that influenced White Fang; for a certain tie
of attachment was forming between him and his surly lord.

Insidiously, and by remote ways, as well as by the power of stick
and stone and clout of hand, were the shackles of White Fang’s
bondage being riveted upon him. The qualities in his kind that
in the beginning made it possible for them to come in to the fires of
men, were qualities capable of development. They were developing
in him, and the camp-life, replete with misery as it was, was secretly
endearing itself to him all the time. But White Fang was unaware
of it. He knew only grief for the loss of Kiche, hope for her
return, and a hungry yearning for the free life that had been his.

### The Outcast

Lip-lip continued so to darken his days that White Fang became wickeder
and more ferocious than it was his natural right to be. Savageness
was a part of his make-up, but the savageness thus developed exceeded
his make-up. He acquired a reputation for wickedness amongst the
man-animals themselves. Wherever there was trouble and uproar
in camp, fighting and squabbling or the outcry of a squaw over a bit
of stolen meat, they were sure to find White Fang mixed up in it and
usually at the bottom of it. They did not bother to look after
the causes of his conduct. They saw only the effects, and the
effects were bad. He was a sneak and a thief, a mischief-maker,
a fomenter of trouble; and irate squaws told him to his face, the while
he eyed them alert and ready to dodge any quick-flung missile, that
he was a wolf and worthless and bound to come to an evil end.

He found himself an outcast in the midst of the populous camp.
All the young dogs followed Lip-lip’s lead. There was a
difference between White Fang and them. Perhaps they sensed his
wild-wood breed, and instinctively felt for him the enmity that the
domestic dog feels for the wolf. But be that as it may, they joined
with Lip-lip in the persecution. And, once declared against him,
they found good reason to continue declared against him. One and
all, from time to time, they felt his teeth; and to his credit, he gave
more than he received. Many of them he could whip in single fight;
but single fight was denied him. The beginning of such a fight
was a signal for all the young dogs in camp to come running and pitch
upon him.

Out of this pack-persecution he learned two important things: how
to take care of himself in a mass-fight against him—and how, on
a single dog, to inflict the greatest amount of damage in the briefest
space of time. To keep one’s feet in the midst of the hostile
mass meant life, and this he learnt well. He became cat-like in
his ability to stay on his feet. Even grown dogs might hurtle
him backward or sideways with the impact of their heavy bodies; and
backward or sideways he would go, in the air or sliding on the ground,
but always with his legs under him and his feet downward to the mother
earth.

When dogs fight, there are usually preliminaries to the actual combat—snarlings
and bristlings and stiff-legged struttings. But White Fang learned
to omit these preliminaries. Delay meant the coming against him
of all the young dogs. He must do his work quickly and get away.
So he learnt to give no warning of his intention. He rushed in
and snapped and slashed on the instant, without notice, before his foe
could prepare to meet him. Thus he learned how to inflict quick
and severe damage. Also he learned the value of surprise.
A dog, taken off its guard, its shoulder slashed open or its ear ripped
in ribbons before it knew what was happening, was a dog half whipped.

Furthermore, it was remarkably easy to overthrow a dog taken by surprise;
while a dog, thus overthrown, invariably exposed for a moment the soft
underside of its neck—the vulnerable point at which to strike
for its life. White Fang knew this point. It was a knowledge
bequeathed to him directly from the hunting generation of wolves.
So it was that White Fang’s method when he took the offensive,
was: first to find a young dog alone; second, to surprise it and knock
it off its feet; and third, to drive in with his teeth at the soft throat.

Being but partly grown his jaws had not yet become large enough nor
strong enough to make his throat-attack deadly; but many a young dog
went around camp with a lacerated throat in token of White Fang’s
intention. And one day, catching one of his enemies alone on the
edge of the woods, he managed, by repeatedly overthrowing him and attacking
the throat, to cut the great vein and let out the life. There
was a great row that night. He had been observed, the news had
been carried to the dead dog’s master, the squaws remembered all
the instances of stolen meat, and Grey Beaver was beset by many angry
voices. But he resolutely held the door of his tepee, inside which
he had placed the culprit, and refused to permit the vengeance for which
his tribespeople clamoured.

White Fang became hated by man and dog. During this period
of his development he never knew a moment’s security. The
tooth of every dog was against him, the hand of every man. He
was greeted with snarls by his kind, with curses and stones by his gods.
He lived tensely. He was always keyed up, alert for attack, wary
of being attacked, with an eye for sudden and unexpected missiles, prepared
to act precipitately and coolly, to leap in with a flash of teeth, or
to leap away with a menacing snarl.

As for snarling he could snarl more terribly than any dog, young
or old, in camp. The intent of the snarl is to warn or frighten,
and judgment is required to know when it should be used. White
Fang knew how to make it and when to make it. Into his snarl he
incorporated all that was vicious, malignant, and horrible. With
nose serrulated by continuous spasms, hair bristling in recurrent waves,
tongue whipping out like a red snake and whipping back again, ears flattened
down, eyes gleaming hatred, lips wrinkled back, and fangs exposed and
dripping, he could compel a pause on the part of almost any assailant.
A temporary pause, when taken off his guard, gave him the vital moment
in which to think and determine his action. But often a pause
so gained lengthened out until it evolved into a complete cessation
from the attack. And before more than one of the grown dogs White
Fang’s snarl enabled him to beat an honourable retreat.

An outcast himself from the pack of the part-grown dogs, his sanguinary
methods and remarkable efficiency made the pack pay for its persecution
of him. Not permitted himself to run with the pack, the curious
state of affairs obtained that no member of the pack could run outside
the pack. White Fang would not permit it. What of his bushwhacking
and waylaying tactics, the young dogs were afraid to run by themselves.
With the exception of Lip-lip, they were compelled to hunch together
for mutual protection against the terrible enemy they had made.
A puppy alone by the river bank meant a puppy dead or a puppy that aroused
the camp with its shrill pain and terror as it fled back from the wolf-cub
that had waylaid it.

But White Fang’s reprisals did not cease, even when the young
dogs had learned thoroughly that they must stay together. He attacked
them when he caught them alone, and they attacked him when they were
bunched. The sight of him was sufficient to start them rushing
after him, at which times his swiftness usually carried him into safety.
But woe the dog that outran his fellows in such pursuit! White
Fang had learned to turn suddenly upon the pursuer that was ahead of
the pack and thoroughly to rip him up before the pack could arrive.
This occurred with great frequency, for, once in full cry, the dogs
were prone to forget themselves in the excitement of the chase, while
White Fang never forgot himself. Stealing backward glances as
he ran, he was always ready to whirl around and down the overzealous
pursuer that outran his fellows.

Young dogs are bound to play, and out of the exigencies of the situation
they realised their play in this mimic warfare. Thus it was that
the hunt of White Fang became their chief game—a deadly game,
withal, and at all times a serious game. He, on the other hand,
being the fastest-footed, was unafraid to venture anywhere. During
the period that he waited vainly for his mother to come back, he led
the pack many a wild chase through the adjacent woods. But the
pack invariably lost him. Its noise and outcry warned him of its
presence, while he ran alone, velvet-footed, silently, a moving shadow
among the trees after the manner of his father and mother before him.
Further he was more directly connected with the Wild than they; and
he knew more of its secrets and stratagems. A favourite trick
of his was to lose his trail in running water and then lie quietly in
a near-by thicket while their baffled cries arose around him.

Hated by his kind and by mankind, indomitable, perpetually warred
upon and himself waging perpetual war, his development was rapid and
one-sided. This was no soil for kindliness and affection to blossom
in. Of such things he had not the faintest glimmering. The
code he learned was to obey the strong and to oppress the weak.
Grey Beaver was a god, and strong. Therefore White Fang obeyed
him. But the dog younger or smaller than himself was weak, a thing
to be destroyed. His development was in the direction of power.
In order to face the constant danger of hurt and even of destruction,
his predatory and protective faculties were unduly developed.
He became quicker of movement than the other dogs, swifter of foot,
craftier, deadlier, more lithe, more lean with ironlike muscle and sinew,
more enduring, more cruel, more ferocious, and more intelligent.
He had to become all these things, else he would not have held his own
nor survive the hostile environment in which he found himself.

### The Trail of the Gods

In the fall of the year, when the days were shortening and the bite
of the frost was coming into the air, White Fang got his chance for
liberty. For several days there had been a great hubbub in the
village. The summer camp was being dismantled, and the tribe,
bag and baggage, was preparing to go off to the fall hunting.
White Fang watched it all with eager eyes, and when the tepees began
to come down and the canoes were loading at the bank, he understood.
Already the canoes were departing, and some had disappeared down the
river.

Quite deliberately he determined to stay behind. He waited
his opportunity to slink out of camp to the woods. Here, in the
running stream where ice was beginning to form, he hid his trail.
Then he crawled into the heart of a dense thicket and waited.
The time passed by, and he slept intermittently for hours. Then
he was aroused by Grey Beaver’s voice calling him by name.
There were other voices. White Fang could hear Grey Beaver’s
squaw taking part in the search, and Mit-sah, who was Grey Beaver’s
son.

White Fang trembled with fear, and though the impulse came to crawl
out of his hiding-place, he resisted it. After a time the voices
died away, and some time after that he crept out to enjoy the success
of his undertaking. Darkness was coming on, and for a while he
played about among the trees, pleasuring in his freedom. Then,
and quite suddenly, he became aware of loneliness. He sat down
to consider, listening to the silence of the forest and perturbed by
it. That nothing moved nor sounded, seemed ominous. He felt
the lurking of danger, unseen and unguessed. He was suspicious
of the looming bulks of the trees and of the dark shadows that might
conceal all manner of perilous things.

Then it was cold. Here was no warm side of a tepee against
which to snuggle. The frost was in his feet, and he kept lifting
first one fore-foot and then the other. He curved his bushy tail
around to cover them, and at the same time he saw a vision. There
was nothing strange about it. Upon his inward sight was impressed
a succession of memory-pictures. He saw the camp again, the tepees,
and the blaze of the fires. He heard the shrill voices of the
women, the gruff basses of the men, and the snarling of the dogs.
He was hungry, and he remembered pieces of meat and fish that had been
thrown him. Here was no meat, nothing but a threatening and inedible
silence.

His bondage had softened him. Irresponsibility had weakened
him. He had forgotten how to shift for himself. The night
yawned about him. His senses, accustomed to the hum and bustle
of the camp, used to the continuous impact of sights and sounds, were
now left idle. There was nothing to do, nothing to see nor hear.
They strained to catch some interruption of the silence and immobility
of nature. They were appalled by inaction and by the feel of something
terrible impending.

He gave a great start of fright. A colossal and formless something
was rushing across the field of his vision. It was a tree-shadow
flung by the moon, from whose face the clouds had been brushed away.
Reassured, he whimpered softly; then he suppressed the whimper for fear
that it might attract the attention of the lurking dangers.

A tree, contracting in the cool of the night, made a loud noise.
It was directly above him. He yelped in his fright. A panic
seized him, and he ran madly toward the village. He knew an overpowering
desire for the protection and companionship of man. In his nostrils
was the smell of the camp-smoke. In his ears the camp-sounds and
cries were ringing loud. He passed out of the forest and into
the moonlit open where were no shadows nor darknesses. But no
village greeted his eyes. He had forgotten. The village
had gone away.

His wild flight ceased abruptly. There was no place to which
to flee. He slunk forlornly through the deserted camp, smelling
the rubbish-heaps and the discarded rags and tags of the gods.
He would have been glad for the rattle of stones about him, flung by
an angry squaw, glad for the hand of Grey Beaver descending upon him
in wrath; while he would have welcomed with delight Lip-lip and the
whole snarling, cowardly pack.

He came to where Grey Beaver’s tepee had stood. In the
centre of the space it had occupied, he sat down. He pointed his
nose at the moon. His throat was afflicted by rigid spasms, his
mouth opened, and in a heart-broken cry bubbled up his loneliness and
fear, his grief for Kiche, all his past sorrows and miseries as well
as his apprehension of sufferings and dangers to come. It was
the long wolf-howl, full-throated and mournful, the first howl he had
ever uttered.

The coming of daylight dispelled his fears but increased his loneliness.
The naked earth, which so shortly before had been so populous; thrust
his loneliness more forcibly upon him. It did not take him long
to make up his mind. He plunged into the forest and followed the
river bank down the stream. All day he ran. He did not rest.
He seemed made to run on for ever. His iron-like body ignored
fatigue. And even after fatigue came, his heritage of endurance
braced him to endless endeavour and enabled him to drive his complaining
body onward.

Where the river swung in against precipitous bluffs, he climbed the
high mountains behind. Rivers and streams that entered the main
river he forded or swam. Often he took to the rim-ice that was
beginning to form, and more than once he crashed through and struggled
for life in the icy current. Always he was on the lookout for
the trail of the gods where it might leave the river and proceed inland.

White Fang was intelligent beyond the average of his kind; yet his
mental vision was not wide enough to embrace the other bank of the Mackenzie.
What if the trail of the gods led out on that side? It never entered
his head. Later on, when he had travelled more and grown older
and wiser and come to know more of trails and rivers, it might be that
he could grasp and apprehend such a possibility. But that mental
power was yet in the future. Just now he ran blindly, his own
bank of the Mackenzie alone entering into his calculations.

All night he ran, blundering in the darkness into mishaps and obstacles
that delayed but did not daunt. By the middle of the second day
he had been running continuously for thirty hours, and the iron of his
flesh was giving out. It was the endurance of his mind that kept
him going. He had not eaten in forty hours, and he was weak with
hunger. The repeated drenchings in the icy water had likewise
had their effect on him. His handsome coat was draggled.
The broad pads of his feet were bruised and bleeding. He had begun
to limp, and this limp increased with the hours. To make it worse,
the light of the sky was obscured and snow began to fall—a raw,
moist, melting, clinging snow, slippery under foot, that hid from him
the landscape he traversed, and that covered over the inequalities of
the ground so that the way of his feet was more difficult and painful.

Grey Beaver had intended camping that night on the far bank of the
Mackenzie, for it was in that direction that the hunting lay.
But on the near bank, shortly before dark, a moose coming down to drink,
had been espied by Kloo-kooch, who was Grey Beaver’s squaw.
Now, had not the moose come down to drink, had not Mit-sah been steering
out of the course because of the snow, had not Kloo-kooch sighted the
moose, and had not Grey Beaver killed it with a lucky shot from his
rifle, all subsequent things would have happened differently.
Grey Beaver would not have camped on the near side of the Mackenzie,
and White Fang would have passed by and gone on, either to die or to
find his way to his wild brothers and become one of them—a wolf
to the end of his days.

Night had fallen. The snow was flying more thickly, and White
Fang, whimpering softly to himself as he stumbled and limped along,
came upon a fresh trail in the snow. So fresh was it that he knew
it immediately for what it was. Whining with eagerness, he followed
back from the river bank and in among the trees. The camp-sounds
came to his ears. He saw the blaze of the fire, Kloo-kooch cooking,
and Grey Beaver squatting on his hams and mumbling a chunk of raw tallow.
There was fresh meat in camp!

White Fang expected a beating. He crouched and bristled a little
at the thought of it. Then he went forward again. He feared
and disliked the beating he knew to be waiting for him. But he
knew, further, that the comfort of the fire would be his, the protection
of the gods, the companionship of the dogs—the last, a companionship
of enmity, but none the less a companionship and satisfying to his gregarious
needs.

He came cringing and crawling into the firelight. Grey Beaver
saw him, and stopped munching the tallow. White Fang crawled slowly,
cringing and grovelling in the abjectness of his abasement and submission.
He crawled straight toward Grey Beaver, every inch of his progress becoming
slower and more painful. At last he lay at the master’s
feet, into whose possession he now surrendered himself, voluntarily,
body and soul. Of his own choice, he came in to sit by man’s
fire and to be ruled by him. White Fang trembled, waiting for
the punishment to fall upon him. There was a movement of the hand
above him. He cringed involuntarily under the expected blow.
It did not fall. He stole a glance upward. Grey Beaver was
breaking the lump of tallow in half! Grey Beaver was offering
him one piece of the tallow! Very gently and somewhat suspiciously,
he first smelled the tallow and then proceeded to eat it. Grey
Beaver ordered meat to be brought to him, and guarded him from the other
dogs while he ate. After that, grateful and content, White Fang
lay at Grey Beaver’s feet, gazing at the fire that warmed him,
blinking and dozing, secure in the knowledge that the morrow would find
him, not wandering forlorn through bleak forest-stretches, but in the
camp of the man-animals, with the gods to whom he had given himself
and upon whom he was now dependent.

### The Covenant

When December was well along, Grey Beaver went on a journey up the
Mackenzie. Mit-sah and Kloo-kooch went with him. One sled
he drove himself, drawn by dogs he had traded for or borrowed.
A second and smaller sled was driven by Mit-sah, and to this was harnessed
a team of puppies. It was more of a toy affair than anything else,
yet it was the delight of Mit-sah, who felt that he was beginning to
do a man’s work in the world. Also, he was learning to drive
dogs and to train dogs; while the puppies themselves were being broken
in to the harness. Furthermore, the sled was of some service,
for it carried nearly two hundred pounds of outfit and food.

White Fang had seen the camp-dogs toiling in the harness, so that
he did not resent overmuch the first placing of the harness upon himself.
About his neck was put a moss-stuffed collar, which was connected by
two pulling-traces to a strap that passed around his chest and over
his back. It was to this that was fastened the long rope by which
he pulled at the sled.

There were seven puppies in the team. The others had been born
earlier in the year and were nine and ten months old, while White Fang
was only eight months old. Each dog was fastened to the sled by
a single rope. No two ropes were of the same length, while the
difference in length between any two ropes was at least that of a dog’s
body. Every rope was brought to a ring at the front end of the
sled. The sled itself was without runners, being a birch-bark
toboggan, with upturned forward end to keep it from ploughing under
the snow. This construction enabled the weight of the sled and
load to be distributed over the largest snow-surface; for the snow was
crystal-powder and very soft. Observing the same principle of
widest distribution of weight, the dogs at the ends of their ropes radiated
fan-fashion from the nose of the sled, so that no dog trod in another’s
footsteps.

There was, furthermore, another virtue in the fan-formation.
The ropes of varying length prevented the dogs attacking from the rear
those that ran in front of them. For a dog to attack another,
it would have to turn upon one at a shorter rope. In which case
it would find itself face to face with the dog attacked, and also it
would find itself facing the whip of the driver. But the most
peculiar virtue of all lay in the fact that the dog that strove to attack
one in front of him must pull the sled faster, and that the faster the
sled travelled, the faster could the dog attacked run away. Thus,
the dog behind could never catch up with the one in front. The
faster he ran, the faster ran the one he was after, and the faster ran
all the dogs. Incidentally, the sled went faster, and thus, by
cunning indirection, did man increase his mastery over the beasts.

Mit-sah resembled his father, much of whose grey wisdom he possessed.
In the past he had observed Lip-lip’s persecution of White Fang;
but at that time Lip-lip was another man’s dog, and Mit-sah had
never dared more than to shy an occasional stone at him. But now
Lip-lip was his dog, and he proceeded to wreak his vengeance on him
by putting him at the end of the longest rope. This made Lip-lip
the leader, and was apparently an honour! but in reality it took away
from him all honour, and instead of being bully and master of the pack,
he now found himself hated and persecuted by the pack.

Because he ran at the end of the longest rope, the dogs had always
the view of him running away before them. All that they saw of
him was his bushy tail and fleeing hind legs—a view far less ferocious
and intimidating than his bristling mane and gleaming fangs. Also,
dogs being so constituted in their mental ways, the sight of him running
away gave desire to run after him and a feeling that he ran away from
them.

The moment the sled started, the team took after Lip-lip in a chase
that extended throughout the day. At first he had been prone to
turn upon his pursuers, jealous of his dignity and wrathful; but at
such times Mit-sah would throw the stinging lash of the thirty-foot
cariboo-gut whip into his face and compel him to turn tail and run on.
Lip-lip might face the pack, but he could not face that whip, and all
that was left him to do was to keep his long rope taut and his flanks
ahead of the teeth of his mates.

But a still greater cunning lurked in the recesses of the Indian
mind. To give point to unending pursuit of the leader, Mit-sah
favoured him over the other dogs. These favours aroused in them
jealousy and hatred. In their presence Mit-sah would give him
meat and would give it to him only. This was maddening to them.
They would rage around just outside the throwing-distance of the whip,
while Lip-lip devoured the meat and Mit-sah protected him. And
when there was no meat to give, Mit-sah would keep the team at a distance
and make believe to give meat to Lip-lip.

White Fang took kindly to the work. He had travelled a greater
distance than the other dogs in the yielding of himself to the rule
of the gods, and he had learned more thoroughly the futility of opposing
their will. In addition, the persecution he had suffered from
the pack had made the pack less to him in the scheme of things, and
man more. He had not learned to be dependent on his kind for companionship.
Besides, Kiche was well-nigh forgotten; and the chief outlet of expression
that remained to him was in the allegiance he tendered the gods he had
accepted as masters. So he worked hard, learned discipline, and
was obedient. Faithfulness and willingness characterised his toil.
These are essential traits of the wolf and the wild-dog when they have
become domesticated, and these traits White Fang possessed in unusual
measure.

A companionship did exist between White Fang and the other dogs,
but it was one of warfare and enmity. He had never learned to
play with them. He knew only how to fight, and fight with them
he did, returning to them a hundred-fold the snaps and slashes they
had given him in the days when Lip-lip was leader of the pack.
But Lip-lip was no longer leader—except when he fled away before
his mates at the end of his rope, the sled bounding along behind.
In camp he kept close to Mit-sah or Grey Beaver or Kloo-kooch.
He did not dare venture away from the gods, for now the fangs of all
dogs were against him, and he tasted to the dregs the persecution that
had been White Fang’s.

With the overthrow of Lip-lip, White Fang could have become leader
of the pack. But he was too morose and solitary for that.
He merely thrashed his team-mates. Otherwise he ignored them.
They got out of his way when he came along; nor did the boldest of them
ever dare to rob him of his meat. On the contrary, they devoured
their own meat hurriedly, for fear that he would take it away from them.
White Fang knew the law well: _to oppress the weak and obey the strong_.
He ate his share of meat as rapidly as he could. And then woe
the dog that had not yet finished! A snarl and a flash of fangs,
and that dog would wail his indignation to the uncomforting stars while
White Fang finished his portion for him.

Every little while, however, one dog or another would flame up in
revolt and be promptly subdued. Thus White Fang was kept in training.
He was jealous of the isolation in which he kept himself in the midst
of the pack, and he fought often to maintain it. But such fights
were of brief duration. He was too quick for the others.
They were slashed open and bleeding before they knew what had happened,
were whipped almost before they had begun to fight.

As rigid as the sled-discipline of the gods, was the discipline maintained
by White Fang amongst his fellows. He never allowed them any latitude.
He compelled them to an unremitting respect for him. They might
do as they pleased amongst themselves. That was no concern of
his. But it _was_ his concern that they leave him alone in
his isolation, get out of his way when he elected to walk among them,
and at all times acknowledge his mastery over them. A hint of
stiff-leggedness on their part, a lifted lip or a bristle of hair, and
he would be upon them, merciless and cruel, swiftly convincing them
of the error of their way.

He was a monstrous tyrant. His mastery was rigid as steel.
He oppressed the weak with a vengeance. Not for nothing had he
been exposed to the pitiless struggles for life in the day of his cubhood,
when his mother and he, alone and unaided, held their own and survived
in the ferocious environment of the Wild. And not for nothing
had he learned to walk softly when superior strength went by.
He oppressed the weak, but he respected the strong. And in the
course of the long journey with Grey Beaver he walked softly indeed
amongst the full-grown dogs in the camps of the strange man-animals
they encountered.

The months passed by. Still continued the journey of Grey Beaver.
White Fang’s strength was developed by the long hours on trail
and the steady toil at the sled; and it would have seemed that his mental
development was well-nigh complete. He had come to know quite
thoroughly the world in which he lived. His outlook was bleak
and materialistic. The world as he saw it was a fierce and brutal
world, a world without warmth, a world in which caresses and affection
and the bright sweetnesses of the spirit did not exist.

He had no affection for Grey Beaver. True, he was a god, but
a most savage god. White Fang was glad to acknowledge his lordship,
but it was a lordship based upon superior intelligence and brute strength.
There was something in the fibre of White Fang’s being that made
his lordship a thing to be desired, else he would not have come back
from the Wild when he did to tender his allegiance. There were
deeps in his nature which had never been sounded. A kind word,
a caressing touch of the hand, on the part of Grey Beaver, might have
sounded these deeps; but Grey Beaver did not caress, nor speak kind
words. It was not his way. His primacy was savage, and savagely
he ruled, administering justice with a club, punishing transgression
with the pain of a blow, and rewarding merit, not by kindness, but by
withholding a blow.

So White Fang knew nothing of the heaven a man’s hand might
contain for him. Besides, he did not like the hands of the man-animals.
He was suspicious of them. It was true that they sometimes gave
meat, but more often they gave hurt. Hands were things to keep
away from. They hurled stones, wielded sticks and clubs and whips,
administered slaps and clouts, and, when they touched him, were cunning
to hurt with pinch and twist and wrench. In strange villages he
had encountered the hands of the children and learned that they were
cruel to hurt. Also, he had once nearly had an eye poked out by
a toddling papoose. From these experiences he became suspicious
of all children. He could not tolerate them. When they came
near with their ominous hands, he got up.

It was in a village at the Great Slave Lake, that, in the course
of resenting the evil of the hands of the man-animals, he came to modify
the law that he had learned from Grey Beaver: namely, that the unpardonable
crime was to bite one of the gods. In this village, after the
custom of all dogs in all villages, White Fang went foraging, for food.
A boy was chopping frozen moose-meat with an axe, and the chips were
flying in the snow. White Fang, sliding by in quest of meat, stopped
and began to eat the chips. He observed the boy lay down the axe
and take up a stout club. White Fang sprang clear, just in time
to escape the descending blow. The boy pursued him, and he, a
stranger in the village, fled between two tepees to find himself cornered
against a high earth bank.

There was no escape for White Fang. The only way out was between
the two tepees, and this the boy guarded. Holding his club prepared
to strike, he drew in on his cornered quarry. White Fang was furious.
He faced the boy, bristling and snarling, his sense of justice outraged.
He knew the law of forage. All the wastage of meat, such as the
frozen chips, belonged to the dog that found it. He had done no
wrong, broken no law, yet here was this boy preparing to give him a
beating. White Fang scarcely knew what happened. He did
it in a surge of rage. And he did it so quickly that the boy did
not know either. All the boy knew was that he had in some unaccountable
way been overturned into the snow, and that his club-hand had been ripped
wide open by White Fang’s teeth.

But White Fang knew that he had broken the law of the gods.
He had driven his teeth into the sacred flesh of one of them, and could
expect nothing but a most terrible punishment. He fled away to
Grey Beaver, behind whose protecting legs he crouched when the bitten
boy and the boy’s family came, demanding vengeance. But
they went away with vengeance unsatisfied. Grey Beaver defended
White Fang. So did Mit-sah and Kloo-kooch. White Fang, listening
to the wordy war and watching the angry gestures, knew that his act
was justified. And so it came that he learned there were gods
and gods. There were his gods, and there were other gods, and
between them there was a difference. Justice or injustice, it
was all the same, he must take all things from the hands of his own
gods. But he was not compelled to take injustice from the other
gods. It was his privilege to resent it with his teeth.
And this also was a law of the gods.

Before the day was out, White Fang was to learn more about this law.
Mit-sah, alone, gathering firewood in the forest, encountered the boy
that had been bitten. With him were other boys. Hot words
passed. Then all the boys attacked Mit-sah. It was going
hard with him. Blows were raining upon him from all sides.
White Fang looked on at first. This was an affair of the gods,
and no concern of his. Then he realised that this was Mit-sah,
one of his own particular gods, who was being maltreated. It was
no reasoned impulse that made White Fang do what he then did.
A mad rush of anger sent him leaping in amongst the combatants.
Five minutes later the landscape was covered with fleeing boys, many
of whom dripped blood upon the snow in token that White Fang’s
teeth had not been idle. When Mit-sah told the story in camp,
Grey Beaver ordered meat to be given to White Fang. He ordered
much meat to be given, and White Fang, gorged and sleepy by the fire,
knew that the law had received its verification.

It was in line with these experiences that White Fang came to learn
the law of property and the duty of the defence of property. From
the protection of his god’s body to the protection of his god’s
possessions was a step, and this step he made. What was his god’s
was to be defended against all the world—even to the extent of
biting other gods. Not only was such an act sacrilegious in its
nature, but it was fraught with peril. The gods were all-powerful,
and a dog was no match against them; yet White Fang learned to face
them, fiercely belligerent and unafraid. Duty rose above fear,
and thieving gods learned to leave Grey Beaver’s property alone.

One thing, in this connection, White Fang quickly learnt, and that
was that a thieving god was usually a cowardly god and prone to run
away at the sounding of the alarm. Also, he learned that but brief
time elapsed between his sounding of the alarm and Grey Beaver coming
to his aid. He came to know that it was not fear of him that drove
the thief away, but fear of Grey Beaver. White Fang did not give
the alarm by barking. He never barked. His method was to
drive straight at the intruder, and to sink his teeth in if he could.
Because he was morose and solitary, having nothing to do with the other
dogs, he was unusually fitted to guard his master’s property;
and in this he was encouraged and trained by Grey Beaver. One
result of this was to make White Fang more ferocious and indomitable,
and more solitary.

The months went by, binding stronger and stronger the covenant between
dog and man. This was the ancient covenant that the first wolf
that came in from the Wild entered into with man. And, like all
succeeding wolves and wild dogs that had done likewise, White Fang worked
the covenant out for himself. The terms were simple. For
the possession of a flesh-and-blood god, he exchanged his own liberty.
Food and fire, protection and companionship, were some of the things
he received from the god. In return, he guarded the god’s
property, defended his body, worked for him, and obeyed him.

The possession of a god implies service. White Fang’s
was a service of duty and awe, but not of love. He did not know
what love was. He had no experience of love. Kiche was a
remote memory. Besides, not only had he abandoned the Wild and
his kind when he gave himself up to man, but the terms of the covenant
were such that if ever he met Kiche again he would not desert his god
to go with her. His allegiance to man seemed somehow a law of
his being greater than the love of liberty, of kind and kin.

### The Famine

The spring of the year was at hand when Grey Beaver finished his
long journey. It was April, and White Fang was a year old when
he pulled into the home villages and was loosed from the harness by
Mit-sah. Though a long way from his full growth, White Fang, next
to Lip-lip, was the largest yearling in the village. Both from
his father, the wolf, and from Kiche, he had inherited stature and strength,
and already he was measuring up alongside the full-grown dogs.
But he had not yet grown compact. His body was slender and rangy,
and his strength more stringy than massive, His coat was the true wolf-grey,
and to all appearances he was true wolf himself. The quarter-strain
of dog he had inherited from Kiche had left no mark on him physically,
though it had played its part in his mental make-up.

He wandered through the village, recognising with staid satisfaction
the various gods he had known before the long journey. Then there
were the dogs, puppies growing up like himself, and grown dogs that
did not look so large and formidable as the memory pictures he retained
of them. Also, he stood less in fear of them than formerly, stalking
among them with a certain careless ease that was as new to him as it
was enjoyable.

There was Baseek, a grizzled old fellow that in his younger days
had but to uncover his fangs to send White Fang cringing and crouching
to the right about. From him White Fang had learned much of his
own insignificance; and from him he was now to learn much of the change
and development that had taken place in himself. While Baseek
had been growing weaker with age, White Fang had been growing stronger
with youth.

It was at the cutting-up of a moose, fresh-killed, that White Fang
learned of the changed relations in which he stood to the dog-world.
He had got for himself a hoof and part of the shin-bone, to which quite
a bit of meat was attached. Withdrawn from the immediate scramble
of the other dogs—in fact out of sight behind a thicket—he
was devouring his prize, when Baseek rushed in upon him. Before
he knew what he was doing, he had slashed the intruder twice and sprung
clear. Baseek was surprised by the other’s temerity and
swiftness of attack. He stood, gazing stupidly across at White
Fang, the raw, red shin-bone between them.

Baseek was old, and already he had come to know the increasing valour
of the dogs it had been his wont to bully. Bitter experiences
these, which, perforce, he swallowed, calling upon all his wisdom to
cope with them. In the old days he would have sprung upon White
Fang in a fury of righteous wrath. But now his waning powers would
not permit such a course. He bristled fiercely and looked ominously
across the shin-bone at White Fang. And White Fang, resurrecting
quite a deal of the old awe, seemed to wilt and to shrink in upon himself
and grow small, as he cast about in his mind for a way to beat a retreat
not too inglorious.

And right here Baseek erred. Had he contented himself with
looking fierce and ominous, all would have been well. White Fang,
on the verge of retreat, would have retreated, leaving the meat to him.
But Baseek did not wait. He considered the victory already his
and stepped forward to the meat. As he bent his head carelessly
to smell it, White Fang bristled slightly. Even then it was not
too late for Baseek to retrieve the situation. Had he merely stood
over the meat, head up and glowering, White Fang would ultimately have
slunk away. But the fresh meat was strong in Baseek’s nostrils,
and greed urged him to take a bite of it.

This was too much for White Fang. Fresh upon his months of
mastery over his own team-mates, it was beyond his self-control to stand
idly by while another devoured the meat that belonged to him.
He struck, after his custom, without warning. With the first slash,
Baseek’s right ear was ripped into ribbons. He was astounded
at the suddenness of it. But more things, and most grievous ones,
were happening with equal suddenness. He was knocked off his feet.
His throat was bitten. While he was struggling to his feet the
young dog sank teeth twice into his shoulder. The swiftness of
it was bewildering. He made a futile rush at White Fang, clipping
the empty air with an outraged snap. The next moment his nose
was laid open, and he was staggering backward away from the meat.

The situation was now reversed. White Fang stood over the shin-bone,
bristling and menacing, while Baseek stood a little way off, preparing
to retreat. He dared not risk a fight with this young lightning-flash,
and again he knew, and more bitterly, the enfeeblement of oncoming age.
His attempt to maintain his dignity was heroic. Calmly turning
his back upon young dog and shin-bone, as though both were beneath his
notice and unworthy of his consideration, he stalked grandly away.
Nor, until well out of sight, did he stop to lick his bleeding wounds.

The effect on White Fang was to give him a greater faith in himself,
and a greater pride. He walked less softly among the grown dogs;
his attitude toward them was less compromising. Not that he went
out of his way looking for trouble. Far from it. But upon
his way he demanded consideration. He stood upon his right to
go his way unmolested and to give trail to no dog. He had to be
taken into account, that was all. He was no longer to be disregarded
and ignored, as was the lot of puppies, and as continued to be the lot
of the puppies that were his team-mates. They got out of the way,
gave trail to the grown dogs, and gave up meat to them under compulsion.
But White Fang, uncompanionable, solitary, morose, scarcely looking
to right or left, redoubtable, forbidding of aspect, remote and alien,
was accepted as an equal by his puzzled elders. They quickly learned
to leave him alone, neither venturing hostile acts nor making overtures
of friendliness. If they left him alone, he left them alone—a
state of affairs that they found, after a few encounters, to be pre-eminently
desirable.

In midsummer White Fang had an experience. Trotting along in
his silent way to investigate a new tepee which had been erected on
the edge of the village while he was away with the hunters after moose,
he came full upon Kiche. He paused and looked at her. He
remembered her vaguely, but he _remembered_ her, and that was more
than could be said for her. She lifted her lip at him in the old
snarl of menace, and his memory became clear. His forgotten cubhood,
all that was associated with that familiar snarl, rushed back to him.
Before he had known the gods, she had been to him the centre-pin of
the universe. The old familiar feelings of that time came back
upon him, surged up within him. He bounded towards her joyously,
and she met him with shrewd fangs that laid his cheek open to the bone.
He did not understand. He backed away, bewildered and puzzled.

But it was not Kiche’s fault. A wolf-mother was not made
to remember her cubs of a year or so before. So she did not remember
White Fang. He was a strange animal, an intruder; and her present
litter of puppies gave her the right to resent such intrusion.

One of the puppies sprawled up to White Fang. They were half-brothers,
only they did not know it. White Fang sniffed the puppy curiously,
whereupon Kiche rushed upon him, gashing his face a second time.
He backed farther away. All the old memories and associations
died down again and passed into the grave from which they had been resurrected.
He looked at Kiche licking her puppy and stopping now and then to snarl
at him. She was without value to him. He had learned to
get along without her. Her meaning was forgotten. There
was no place for her in his scheme of things, as there was no place
for him in hers.

He was still standing, stupid and bewildered, the memories forgotten,
wondering what it was all about, when Kiche attacked him a third time,
intent on driving him away altogether from the vicinity. And White
Fang allowed himself to be driven away. This was a female of his
kind, and it was a law of his kind that the males must not fight the
females. He did not know anything about this law, for it was no
generalisation of the mind, not a something acquired by experience of
the world. He knew it as a secret prompting, as an urge of instinct—of
the same instinct that made him howl at the moon and stars of nights,
and that made him fear death and the unknown.

The months went by. White Fang grew stronger, heavier, and
more compact, while his character was developing along the lines laid
down by his heredity and his environment. His heredity was a life-stuff
that may be likened to clay. It possessed many possibilities,
was capable of being moulded into many different forms. Environment
served to model the clay, to give it a particular form. Thus,
had White Fang never come in to the fires of man, the Wild would have
moulded him into a true wolf. But the gods had given him a different
environment, and he was moulded into a dog that was rather wolfish,
but that was a dog and not a wolf.

And so, according to the clay of his nature and the pressure of his
surroundings, his character was being moulded into a certain particular
shape. There was no escaping it. He was becoming more morose,
more uncompanionable, more solitary, more ferocious; while the dogs
were learning more and more that it was better to be at peace with him
than at war, and Grey Beaver was coming to prize him more greatly with
the passage of each day.

White Fang, seeming to sum up strength in all his qualities, nevertheless
suffered from one besetting weakness. He could not stand being
laughed at. The laughter of men was a hateful thing. They
might laugh among themselves about anything they pleased except himself,
and he did not mind. But the moment laughter was turned upon him
he would fly into a most terrible rage. Grave, dignified, sombre,
a laugh made him frantic to ridiculousness. It so outraged him
and upset him that for hours he would behave like a demon. And
woe to the dog that at such times ran foul of him. He knew the
law too well to take it out of Grey Beaver; behind Grey Beaver were
a club and godhead. But behind the dogs there was nothing but
space, and into this space they flew when White Fang came on the scene,
made mad by laughter.

In the third year of his life there came a great famine to the Mackenzie
Indians. In the summer the fish failed. In the winter the
cariboo forsook their accustomed track. Moose were scarce, the
rabbits almost disappeared, hunting and preying animals perished.
Denied their usual food-supply, weakened by hunger, they fell upon and
devoured one another. Only the strong survived. White Fang’s
gods were always hunting animals. The old and the weak of them
died of hunger. There was wailing in the village, where the women
and children went without in order that what little they had might go
into the bellies of the lean and hollow-eyed hunters who trod the forest
in the vain pursuit of meat.

To such extremity were the gods driven that they ate the soft-tanned
leather of their mocassins and mittens, while the dogs ate the harnesses
off their backs and the very whip-lashes. Also, the dogs ate one
another, and also the gods ate the dogs. The weakest and the more
worthless were eaten first. The dogs that still lived, looked
on and understood. A few of the boldest and wisest forsook the
fires of the gods, which had now become a shambles, and fled into the
forest, where, in the end, they starved to death or were eaten by wolves.

In this time of misery, White Fang, too, stole away into the woods.
He was better fitted for the life than the other dogs, for he had the
training of his cubhood to guide him. Especially adept did he
become in stalking small living things. He would lie concealed
for hours, following every movement of a cautious tree-squirrel, waiting,
with a patience as huge as the hunger he suffered from, until the squirrel
ventured out upon the ground. Even then, White Fang was not premature.
He waited until he was sure of striking before the squirrel could gain
a tree-refuge. Then, and not until then, would he flash from his
hiding-place, a grey projectile, incredibly swift, never failing its
mark—the fleeing squirrel that fled not fast enough.

Successful as he was with squirrels, there was one difficulty that
prevented him from living and growing fat on them. There were
not enough squirrels. So he was driven to hunt still smaller things.
So acute did his hunger become at times that he was not above rooting
out wood-mice from their burrows in the ground. Nor did he scorn
to do battle with a weasel as hungry as himself and many times more
ferocious.

In the worst pinches of the famine he stole back to the fires of
the gods. But he did not go into the fires. He lurked in
the forest, avoiding discovery and robbing the snares at the rare intervals
when game was caught. He even robbed Grey Beaver’s snare
of a rabbit at a time when Grey Beaver staggered and tottered through
the forest, sitting down often to rest, what of weakness and of shortness
of breath.

One day While Fang encountered a young wolf, gaunt and scrawny, loose-jointed
with famine. Had he not been hungry himself, White Fang might
have gone with him and eventually found his way into the pack amongst
his wild brethren. As it was, he ran the young wolf down and killed
and ate him.

Fortune seemed to favour him. Always, when hardest pressed
for food, he found something to kill. Again, when he was weak,
it was his luck that none of the larger preying animals chanced upon
him. Thus, he was strong from the two days’ eating a lynx
had afforded him when the hungry wolf-pack ran full tilt upon him.
It was a long, cruel chase, but he was better nourished than they, and
in the end outran them. And not only did he outrun them, but,
circling widely back on his track, he gathered in one of his exhausted
pursuers.

After that he left that part of the country and journeyed over to
the valley wherein he had been born. Here, in the old lair, he
encountered Kiche. Up to her old tricks, she, too, had fled the
inhospitable fires of the gods and gone back to her old refuge to give
birth to her young. Of this litter but one remained alive when
White Fang came upon the scene, and this one was not destined to live
long. Young life had little chance in such a famine.

Kiche’s greeting of her grown son was anything but affectionate.
But White Fang did not mind. He had outgrown his mother.
So he turned tail philosophically and trotted on up the stream.
At the forks he took the turning to the left, where he found the lair
of the lynx with whom his mother and he had fought long before.
Here, in the abandoned lair, he settled down and rested for a day.

During the early summer, in the last days of the famine, he met Lip-lip,
who had likewise taken to the woods, where he had eked out a miserable
existence.

White Fang came upon him unexpectedly. Trotting in opposite
directions along the base of a high bluff, they rounded a corner of
rock and found themselves face to face. They paused with instant
alarm, and looked at each other suspiciously.

White Fang was in splendid condition. His hunting had been
good, and for a week he had eaten his fill. He was even gorged
from his latest kill. But in the moment he looked at Lip-lip his
hair rose on end all along his back. It was an involuntary bristling
on his part, the physical state that in the past had always accompanied
the mental state produced in him by Lip-lip’s bullying and persecution.
As in the past he had bristled and snarled at sight of Lip-lip, so now,
and automatically, he bristled and snarled. He did not waste any
time. The thing was done thoroughly and with despatch. Lip-lip
essayed to back away, but White Fang struck him hard, shoulder to shoulder.
Lip-lip was overthrown and rolled upon his back. White Fang’s
teeth drove into the scrawny throat. There was a death-struggle,
during which White Fang walked around, stiff-legged and observant.
Then he resumed his course and trotted on along the base of the bluff.

One day, not long after, he came to the edge of the forest, where
a narrow stretch of open land sloped down to the Mackenzie. He
had been over this ground before, when it was bare, but now a village
occupied it. Still hidden amongst the trees, he paused to study
the situation. Sights and sounds and scents were familiar to him.
It was the old village changed to a new place. But sights and
sounds and smells were different from those he had last had when he
fled away from it. There was no whimpering nor wailing.
Contented sounds saluted his ear, and when he heard the angry voice
of a woman he knew it to be the anger that proceeds from a full stomach.
And there was a smell in the air of fish. There was food.
The famine was gone. He came out boldly from the forest and trotted
into camp straight to Grey Beaver’s tepee. Grey Beaver was
not there; but Kloo-kooch welcomed him with glad cries and the whole
of a fresh-caught fish, and he lay down to wait Grey Beaver’s
coming.
